Hello everybody and welcome back.
In this lecture we're going to learn how to manipulate our vertices, edges and faces even more by deleting
dissolving and filling.
So let's start off by going back out of edit mode and into object mode.
If we have our objects selected and hit the X key it gives us one option which is to delete it.
Fair enough.
What happens if we do the same thing with everything selected in edit mode.
Oh we get a lot more options.
Now we're going to deal with vertices, edges, faces, only edges and faces, only faces, dissolving our edges
and faces as well.
So we've got quite a bit to cover but as you see as we go down some of them are pretty self-explanatory
once we've learned a couple of them.
So let's start off with deleting vertices with everything selected.
If we were to do that it would just disappear.
However if with Vertex select on we select one individual vertex and we can see that it's selected with
the orange slowly fading out from the vertex along these edges.
Now if we go ahead and hit X and delete that vertex you'll see that it leaves us almost with a corner
of a room.
And this is how some people set up a corner of a room ready to go ahead and put some other objects inside
it.
This is obviously a very small room.
It's two meters by two meters.
Now the other thing to notice here is not only has that vertex gone but the edges that were made because
that vertex existed has also gone and the faces that those edges made have also gone as well.
And with that in mind if we switch the edge select, select this edge along the edge here go X and to
the edges.
Now whereas if we had removed this vertex both edges would have gone because we've only deleted the
edge, it's left the vertex alone and the edge above it.
However the face that was there has gone.
Now what we can do to repair that is we can click this top hedge hold down shift and click this bottom
edge and press the F key and that will fill that back in and we can fill the top in to some extent as
well if we were to select those two top edges and then press the F key.
It will fill that in accordingly.
Now it's not quite the square that it once was on top and there's no way of directly remaking that from
here.
Without that additional vertex.
But you can see that filling in is a great way of repairing your model if you accidentally delete something
you didn't intend to.
Now the other thing that you can do is this top face here for instance if you were to go in and go X
whilst it's selected and do faces it would delete that face in its entirety but it will leave the edge
alone underneath.
And that's really useful because if I undo that and we went X and vertices would only be left with the
plane down at the bottom this square, I'm going to undo that again and get back to here.
Now dissolving vertices is a different matter altogether.
There's nothing on here I can really show you to do that.
However if we go to the file menu and go to open recent and I go to my challenge my wedge that I've got
here I can actually show you a dissolve in action.
So this is where we assessed that we've got unnecessary geometry along here.
So how do we go ahead and sort that out.
Well these two vertices are superfluous.
We do not need them.
They do not add anything to this particular shape.
Sure.
If we had a different shape then they're important but whilst they're flat along the bottom they have
no relevance to this model.
Now you might think at this point you would go ahead and go X and dissolve vertices.
However we do that it starts to look a little weird.
It doesn't seem to have an edge anymore along the bottom here.
In fact if we go into wireframe mode we see that is in fact the case we've got a kind of hollow shell
that we once had.
Now unfortunately what we should have done is have only one selected if we were doing that and because
we actually had an edge that we wanted to make magically disappear.
What we should have done is gone X and dissolve edges and there we go we've now got our shape back to
how it was before.
And we've gotten rid of any superfluous geometry and there we go.
We've got a perfect wedge and now it's time to practice those skills with a quick challenge and your
challenge is to make the same wedge as before.
Now this is so you're familiar with the object and we start making different things soon.
Don't worry about that.
So we're sticking with the same dimensions as it was before but this time use any mixture of deleting
dissolving and filling to make the wedge.
And of course you'll probably have to do some moving scaling and rotation as well.
Go ahead pause video now and give that a go.
Okay everybody Welcome back.
Let's go ahead and make a wedge.
But this time using deleting and dissolving to make it okay.
So the smart ones out there may have just loaded up their previous challenge gone into it selected the
edge along the bottom.
Just like we did in the example and dissolved edges.
If you have done that I'll give you a point.
Don't worry but let's go back to the very beginning and see what we can create from there because that
doesn't really practice the skills of the lesson.
So what we can do here is go into edit mode and just move everything into the appropriate starting location.
It was before.
So we've moved it up by one unit and across by one unit.
This edge at the top here and we can select an edge by also selecting the vertices that make that edge.
And I'm just going to delete that and gets it out of the way so I'm going to delete the vertices.
I'm going to select this bottom edge so I'm going to go into edge select mode and move it along the
y axis by 2.
And now it's simply a matter of selecting the edges pressing f selecting the edges and pressing F and
then finally this top one.
Now you don't have to select all four of the edges here it will automatically fill in and there we go
we've got our wedge back again.
Now whether or not the first way or the second way is the best way of making the wedge.
What you will find that you'd go through playing with Blender is the best way of doing something is
often contextual rather than an absolute.
So depending on the model you're making and what your end goal actually is you may find yourself using
different techniques at different points in time depending on the circumstance.
And there we go.
That's my wedge done.
How did you go about sets.
I'm very interested in knowing and you sharing in the discussions.
What technique you used and that's a good way of learning analyzing your own technique.
Having a look at each others as well so go hop over to the forum and have a look at how other people
have done it as well because that will give you a good insights.
You'll remember those points and later on through the course you'll go.
Ah I remember John he he did it that way and Mike did it that way and later on recalling that might
be incredibly useful.
So go ahead share your work over in the discussions and I'll see you all in the next lecture.